## The Limited Scope of Judicial Estoppel Over Patent Claim Construction
The Federal Circuit took invoked a seldom used tool of equity in _Sherwin-Williams Co. v. PPG Indus._.[^1]  In this 2024 case, the court held that Sherwin-Williams was judicially estopped from presenting evidence that contradicted earlier admissions related to the construction of the contested claims.[^2]  In this article, the narrowness of judicial estoppel’s role in claim construction hearings will be examined through the lens of this case. For the sake of context, the history of the claim construction process will be reviewed. Then, Sherwin-Williams Co. can be held up against the factors that justify invocation of judicial estoppel. To aid in this analysis, cases in which individual factors were dispositive in the denial of judicial estoppel will be brought forward for comparison. By doing so, the author hopes that the uniqueness of the Sherwin-Williams Co. result can be properly appreciated. 
The question of whose responsibility it is to interpret the meaning of a patent was resolved in 1996 in Markman v. Westview Instruments.  Presented with the choice between laying the interpretative duty at the feet of the judge or the jury, the court, led by Justice Souter, unanimously chose the former.  In doing so, the court made the ultimate question of a patent’s meaning a question of law.  In 2015, the court, this time led by Justice Breyer, added some additional nuance to this position.  Justice Breyer explained that certain “underlying conclusions” were closer to questions of fact than they were to questions of law.  While this decision was primarily concerned with the correct standard of review for these “underlying conclusions,” the mixing of law and fact in claim construction raises an interesting question. What is to stop a litigant from taking disparate, and potentially adverse, factual stances on these underlying factual conclusions?
To be sure, preclusion remains an obstacle for a litigant attempting to relitigate the judicial construction of a claim.  The granular factual conclusions that underpin this judicial construction present a separate issue, however. This is where the court may apply judicial estoppel.  The court is permitted to invoke judicial estoppel following an analysis of the following non-exclusive factors:

>(1) whether the party's later position [is] ‘clearly inconsistent’ with its earlier position;
>
>(2) whether the party has succeeded in persuading a court to accept that party's earlier position, so that judicial acceptance of an inconsistent position in a later proceeding would create ‘the perception that either the first or the second court was misled’; and
>
>(3) whether the party seeking to assert an inconsistent position would derive an unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment on the opposing party if not estopped.

At issue in Sherwin-Williams Co. is the plaintiff’s assertion that a piece of prior art, referred to as Perez, disclosed a coating that was not BPA-free, despite having asserted to the contrary in a prior litigation.  For those uninitiated—or merely uninterested—in the food container coating field, food safe coatings are often applied to the inside of cans destined for food.  Due to the thermo-mechanical needs of the application, these coatings must be sufficiently flexible.  Historically, BPA was chosen for this reason but efforts to produce BPA-free coatings followed a public concern over the health effects of BPA-containing coatings.  To this end, Sherwin-Williams’ subsidiary filed for a patent on a coating that was “substantially free of BPA.”  In defending the patent against Inter Partes Review, Sherwin-Williams successfully asserted that, while the Perez patent disclosed a BPA-free coating, the disclosed composition would be unsuitable for beverage can coatings.  In the cases below, however, Sherwin-Williams wanted to present evidence that the Perez patent did not disclose a composition that was BPA-free.  The district court invoked judicial estoppel to preclude this evidence and the jury held for the defendant.  Sherwin-Williams appealed this application of judicial estoppel to the Federal Circuit.

The first factor evaluated when contemplating judicial estoppel of a factual assertion is whether the two positions are clearly inconsistent. In the case under inspection, this may be the easiest factor to dispose of. In 2017, Sherwin-Williams asserted Perez was BPA-free.  In 2024, they asserted that it was not.  While there is little space for nuance in this first factor, courts have held that construction of individual words in a prior litigation is not de facto inconsistent with a subsequent construction of a larger, encompassing phrase.  Put another way, if earlier construction did not require construction of a larger phrase, the prior construction of components of the phrase will generally not estop subsequent claim construction arguments by the parties. 

The second factor, judicial acceptance of the argued position, appears to be similarly easy to dispose of. It is important to note, however, that Sherwin-William’s position was accepted before the PTAB, not a state or federal court.  Judicial estoppel extends beyond the walls of the court when looking for acceptance. This includes administrative agency adjudication.  Obviously, the choice itself is binary, especially once the question of clear inconsistency of the positions is resolved.  In Sherwin-Williams’ case, it is inarguable that their prior position was accepted when the PTAB reversed the examiner’s findings.

This brings the analysis to the final—and most opaque—of the enumerated factors. That the asserted position would provide some “unfair advantage” to the party is critical here.  The court concluded that allowing Sherwin-Williams to get a second bite at the apple in characterizing Perez would be unfair to the defendant.  Critical to this conclusion was the defendant’s reliance on the 2017 construction of Perez.  In this third factor, however, the Federal Circuit maintains a unique posture. In some circuits, judicial estoppel requires a showing of bad faith.  District courts have similarly held that judicial estoppel in inapplicable absent intentions to mislead the court or engage in malfeasance.

The question of which standard for judicial to apply adds further complexity to this discussion. The court in Sherwin-Williams Co. rejected the notion that a showing of bad faith was required to invoke judicial estoppel.  This was premised on the application of Federal Circuit law.  As the assertions at issue were made before the USPTO—over which the Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction—the court applied its own standards.  While this decision is non-precedential, this necessarily implies that, should the assertions arise not in front of a Third Circuit district court, a showing of bad faith would be required in an appeal to the Federal Circuit.

This is all to show that, in the realm of patent litigation, judicial estoppel is applied sparingly and confusingly. Given the highly technical nature of claim construction, inconsistency must necessarily be strictly analyzed. The courts applying it consider both adjudication in front of the USPTO and in front of courts. More importantly, the final factor, which courts have held is determinative, will be applied in a non-uniform manner, potentially to the detriment of one party.  Here, Sherwin-Williams may have lost on a procedural note.  Given the propensity for IPR proceedings to run in tandem with district court proceedings and result in stays in the district court, however, the Federal Circuit standards will often be the threshold that must be met.  Traps for the unwary remain, though. Proper caution as to procedural posture is therefore exceedingly important when arguing the invocation of judicial estoppel.

---

[^1]: Sherwin-Williams Co. v. PPG Indus., Inc., No. 2022-2059, 2024 WL 3534113, at *1 (Fed. Cir. July 25, 2024).
[^2]: _Id._ at *2-3.
