---
categories: Intellectual Property
---

## The Limited Scope of Judicial Estoppel Over Patent Claim Construction

The Federal Circuit took invoked a seldom used tool of equity in
*Sherwin-Williams Co. v. PPG Indus.*.[^1] In this 2024 case, the court
held that Sherwin-Williams was *judicially estopped* from presenting
evidence that contradicted earlier admissions related to the
construction of the contested claims.[^2] In this article, the
narrowness of judicial estoppel's role in claim construction hearings
will be examined through the lens of this case. For the sake of context,
the history of the claim construction process will be reviewed. Then,
*Sherwin-Williams Co.* can be held up against the factors that justify
invocation of judicial estoppel. To aid in this analysis, cases in which
individual factors were dispositive in the denial of judicial estoppel
will be brought forward for comparison. By doing so, the author hopes
that the uniqueness of the *Sherwin-Williams Co.* result can be properly
appreciated.

The question of whose responsibility it is to interpret the meaning of a
patent was resolved in 1996 in *Markman v. Westview Instruments*.[^3]
Presented with the choice between laying the interpretative duty at the
feet of the judge or the jury, the court, led by Justice Souter,
unanimously chose the former.[^4] In doing so, the court made the
ultimate question of a patent's meaning a question of law.[^5] In 2015,
the court, this time led by Justice Breyer, added some additional nuance
to this position.[^6] Justice Breyer explained that certain "underlying
conclusions" were closer to questions of fact than they were to
questions of law.[^7] While this decision was primarily concerned with
the correct standard of review for these "underlying conclusions," the
mixing of law and fact in claim construction raises an interesting
question. What is to stop a litigant from taking disparate, and
potentially adverse, factual stances on these underlying factual
conclusions?

To be sure, preclusion remains an obstacle for a litigant attempting to
relitigate the judicial construction of a claim.[^8] The granular
factual conclusions that underpin this judicial construction present a
separate issue, however. This is where the court may apply judicial
estoppel.[^9] The court is permitted to invoke judicial estoppel
following an analysis of the following non-exclusive factors:

> \(1\) whether the party\'s later position \[is\] 'clearly
> inconsistent' with its earlier position;
>
> \(2\) whether the party has succeeded in persuading a court to accept
> that party\'s earlier position, so that judicial acceptance of an
> inconsistent position in a later proceeding would create 'the
> perception that either the first or the second court was misled'; and
>
> \(3\) whether the party seeking to assert an inconsistent position
> would derive an unfair advantage or impose an unfair detriment on the
> opposing party if not estopped.[^10]

At issue in *Sherwin-Williams Co.* is the plaintiff's assertion that a
piece of prior art, referred to as *Perez*, disclosed a coating that was
not BPA-free, despite having asserted to the contrary in a prior
litigation.[^11] For those uninitiated---or merely uninterested---in the
food container coating field, food safe coatings are often applied to
the inside of cans destined for food.[^12] Due to the thermo-mechanical
needs of the application, these coatings must be sufficiently
flexible.[^13] Historically, BPA was chosen for this reason but efforts
to produce BPA-free coatings followed a public concern over the health
effects of BPA-containing coatings.[^14] To this end, Sherwin-Williams'
subsidiary filed for a patent on a coating that was "substantially free
of BPA."[^15] In defending the patent against *Inter Partes* Review,
Sherwin-Williams successfully asserted that, while the *Perez* patent
disclosed a BPA-free coating, the disclosed composition would be
unsuitable for beverage can coatings.[^16] In the cases below, however,
Sherwin-Williams wanted to present evidence that the *Perez* patent did
not disclose a composition that was BPA-free.[^17] The district court
invoked judicial estoppel to preclude this evidence and the jury held
for the defendant.[^18] Sherwin-Williams appealed this application of
judicial estoppel to the Federal Circuit.[^19]

The first factor evaluated when contemplating judicial estoppel of a
factual assertion is whether the two positions are clearly inconsistent.
In the case under inspection, this may be the easiest factor to dispose
of. In 2017, Sherwin-Williams asserted *Perez* was BPA-free.[^20] In
2024, they asserted that it was not.[^21] While there is little space
for nuance in this first factor, courts have held that construction of
individual words in a prior litigation is not *de facto* inconsistent
with a subsequent construction of a larger, encompassing phrase.[^22]
Put another way, if earlier construction did not require construction of
a larger phrase, the prior construction of components of the phrase will
generally not estop subsequent claim construction arguments by the
parties.[^23]

The second factor, judicial acceptance of the argued position, appears
to be similarly easy to dispose of. It is important to note, however,
that Sherwin-William's position was accepted before the PTAB, not a
state or federal court.[^24] Judicial estoppel extends beyond the walls
of the court when looking for acceptance. This includes administrative
agency adjudication.[^25] Obviously, the choice itself is binary,
especially once the question of clear inconsistency of the positions is
resolved.[^26] In Sherwin-Williams' case, it is inarguable that their
prior position was accepted when the PTAB reversed the examiner's
findings.[^27]

This brings the analysis to the final---and most opaque---of the
enumerated factors. That the asserted position would provide some
"unfair advantage" to the party is critical here.[^28] The court
concluded that allowing Sherwin-Williams to get a second bite at the
apple in characterizing *Perez* would be unfair to the defendant.[^29]
Critical to this conclusion was the defendant's reliance on the 2017
construction of *Perez*.[^30] In this third factor, however, the Federal
Circuit maintains a unique posture. In some circuits, judicial estoppel
requires a showing of bad faith.[^31] District courts have similarly
held that judicial estoppel in inapplicable absent intentions to mislead
the court or engage in malfeasance.[^32]

The question of which standard for judicial to apply adds further
complexity to this discussion. The court in *Sherwin-Williams Co.*
rejected the notion that a showing of bad faith was required to invoke
judicial estoppel.[^33] This was premised on the application of Federal
Circuit law.[^34] As the assertions at issue were made before the
USPTO---over which the Federal Circuit has exclusive jurisdiction---the
court applied its own standards.[^35] While this decision is
non-precedential, this necessarily implies that, should the assertions
arise not in front of a Third Circuit district court, a showing of bad
faith would be required in an appeal to the Federal Circuit.

This is all to show that, in the realm of patent litigation, judicial
estoppel is applied sparingly and confusingly. Given the highly
technical nature of claim construction, inconsistency must necessarily
be strictly analyzed. The courts applying it consider both adjudication
in front of the USPTO and in front of courts. More importantly, the
final factor, which courts have held is determinative, will be applied
in a non-uniform manner, potentially to the detriment of one party.[^36]
Here, Sherwin-Williams may have lost on a procedural note.[^37] Given
the propensity for IPR proceedings to run in tandem with district court
proceedings and result in stays in the district court, however, the
Federal Circuit standards will often be the threshold that must be
met.[^38] Traps for the unwary remain, though. Proper caution as to
procedural posture is therefore exceedingly important when arguing the
invocation of judicial estoppel.

---

[^1]: *Sherwin-Williams Co. v. PPG Indus., Inc.*, No. 2022-2059, 2024 WL
    3534113, at \*1 (Fed. Cir. July 25, 2024)

[^2]: *Id.*, at \*2-3.

[^3]: Markman v. Westview Instruments, 517 U.S. 370 (1996).

[^4]: *Id.* at 388.

[^5]: *Id.*

[^6]: Teva Pharms. USA, Inc. v. Sandoz, Inc., 574 U.S. 318 (2015).

[^7]: *Id.* at 325-27.

[^8]: *Id.* at 329.

[^9]: 18 Moore\'s Federal Practice - Civil ┬º 134.30 (2024).

[^10]: Sherwin-Williams Co. v. PPG Indus., Inc., No. 2022-2059, 2024 WL
    3534113, at \*7 (Fed. Cir. July 25, 2024)(quoting New Hampshire v.
    Maine, 532 U.S. 742, 750--51 (2001))(internal quotations removed).

[^11]: *Id.* at \*1-2.

[^12]: *Id.*

[^13]: *Id.*

[^14]: *See generally,* Sarah A. Vogel, *The Politics of Plastics: The
    Making and Unmaking of Bisphenol A "Safety"*, 99 [Am. J. of Pub.
    Health S556 (2009).]{.smallcaps}

[^15]: Sherwin-Williams Co., 2024 WL 3534113 at \*1.

[^16]: *Id.*

[^17]: *Id.* at \*2.

[^18]: *Id.*

[^19]: *Id.*

[^20]: *Id.* at \*7-8.

[^21]: *Id.*

[^22]: Sandisk Corp. v. Memorex Prods., 415 F.3d 1278, 1291 (Fed. Cir.
    2005).

[^23]: *Id.* at 1291-92.

[^24]: Sherwin-Williams Co., 2024 WL 3534113 at \*7-8.

[^25]: *See supra* note 9.

[^26]: *See generally*, SkyHawke Techs., LLC v. DECA Int\'l Corp., 828
    F.3d 1373, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2016)(not applying judicial estoppel
    because the inconsistent position was not accepted in the previous
    litigation).

[^27]: Sherwin-Williams Co., 2024 WL 3534113 at \*9.

[^28]: *Id.*

[^29]: *Id*.

[^30]: *Id.*

[^31]: *See*, Chao v. Roy\'s Constr. Inc., 517 F.3d 180, 186 n.5 (3d
    Cir. 2008); Eubanks v. CBSK Fin. Grp., Inc., 385 F.3d 894, 895 (6th
    Cir. 2004).

[^32]: Panduit Corp. v. Corning Inc., No. 5:18-CV-229-FL, 2021 U.S.
    Dist. LEXIS 124157, at \*2-3 (E.D.N.C. July 2, 2021)("plaintiff
    failed to show that defendant engaged in malfeasance, purposefully
    inequitable conduct, or otherwise intentionally misled this court or
    the Patent Trial and Appeal Board . . . ").

[^33]: Sherwin-Williams Co., 2024 WL 3534113 at \*9.

[^34]: *Id.* at \*6.

[^35]: *Id.*

[^36]: Panduit Corp., 2021 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 124157 at \*2.

[^37]: Sherwin-Williams Co., 2024 WL 3534113 at \*6.

[^38]: *See*, Jason E. Stach & Benjamin A. Saidman, *Maximizing the
    Likelihood of a Litigation Stay Pending Inter Partes Review*,
    [Finnegan]{.smallcaps},
    https://www.finnegan.com/en/insights/articles/maximizing-the-likelihood-of-a-litigation-stay-pending-inter.html#:\~:text=Although%20the%20test%20varies%20by,(3)%20%E2%80%9Cwhether%20a%20stay.
